R and rstudio basic (#15)
EDUCE-UBC/educer: inst/tutorials/r_and_rstudio_basic/r_and_rstudio_basic.Rmd

---
title: "Introduction to R and RStudio fundamentals"
author: "Michelle Kang (adapted from Dr. Kim Dill-McFarland)"
date: "version `r format(Sys.time(), '%B %d, %Y')`"
output:
  learnr::tutorial:
    progressive: true
    allow_skip: true
runtime: shiny_prerendered

> description: This tutorial covers the basics of R and RStudio. You will learn about the different panes and features of RStudio that make coding in R easier, as well as basic skills of the R language itself, such as creating functions and loading packages.

Author: ```suggestion
description: Welcome to R! If you want to analyze and visualize data reproducibly, you've come to the right place. This tutorial covers the basics of R and RStudio. RStudio is a free program used for coding in R. After learning about its features and functionality, we will dive into R language basics, where you will create functions and load packages.
```

---

```{r setup, include = FALSE}
# General learnr setup
library(learnr)
knitr::opts_chunk$set(echo = TRUE)
library(educer)
# Helper function to set path to images to "/images" etc.
setup_resources()

# Tutorial specific setup
library(dplyr)
library(readr)
total <- 4
```

## Learning objectives

By the end of this tutorial you should be able to:

- Identify the different components of RStudio.
- Declare variables in R.
- Recognize and use functions.
- Install and load R packages.
- Load and subset tabular data using tidyverse.
- Use the `help` function in R console to troubleshoot given a new function.

> The last bullet point can be more descriptive saying, "Use the `help` function in R console to troubleshoot and *identify mandatory parameters* given a new function."

Author: ```suggestion
- Use the `help` function in R console to troubleshoot and identify required arguments for a given function
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion

```

Author: I personally prefer learning objectives with each section

## A Tour of RStudio

> 

Author: ```suggestion
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
- Name the three panes in RStudio and what they do
- Change the sizes of the panes
- Navigate through the console using common keyboard shortcuts
- Change the appearance of RStudio
```

When you start RStudio, you will see something like the following window appear:

![](/images/rstudio.png){width=100%}

> Notice that the window has three "panes":

Reviewer: There are four panes and an option in, tools > global options > pane layout to customize the panels. Would it be useful to include here?

> - Console (lower left side): this is your view of the R engine. You can type in R commands here and see the output printed by R. (To tell them apart, your input is in blue, and the output is black.) There are several editing conveniences available: use up and down arrow keys to go back to previously entered commands, which you then can edit and re-run; TAB for completing the name before the cursor; see more in [online docs](http://www.rstudio.com/ide/docs/using/keyboard_shortcuts).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Console (lower left side): this is your view of the R engine. You can type in R commands here and see the output printed by R. (To tell them apart, your input is in blue, and the output is black.) There are several editing conveniences available: up and down arrow keys to go back to previously entered commands which you then can edit and re-run, TAB for completing the name before the cursor, and so on. See more in [online docs](http://www.rstudio.com/ide/docs/using/keyboard_shortcuts).
```

- Environment/History (tabbed in the upper right): view current user-defined objects and previously-entered commands, respectively.

- Files/Help/Plots/Packages (tabbed in the lower right): as their names suggest, you can view the contents of the current directory, the built-in help pages, and the graphics you created, as well as manage R packages.

> To change the look of RStudio, you can go to Tools &rarr; Global Options &rarr; Appearance and select colours, font size, etc. If you plan to be working for longer periods, we suggest choosing a dark background colour scheme to save your computer battery and your eyes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To change the look of RStudio, you can go to Tools &rarr; Global Options &rarr; Appearance and select colours, font size, etc. If you plan on working for longer periods of time, we suggest choosing a dark background colour which is less hard on your computer battery and your eyes.
```

You can also change the sizes of the panes by dragging the dividers or clicking on the expand and compress icons at the top right corner of each pane. 

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```{r quiz: R Tour, echo=FALSE}
question("Which pane enables you to manage R packages?",
    answer("The console"),
    answer("Lower right pane", correct=TRUE),
    answer("Upper right pane")
)
```

## RStudio Projects

> 

Author: ```suggestion
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
- List the benefits of using RStudio Projects
- Create a new RStudio Project
- Open or switch to an existing RStudio Project
```

> Projects are a great feature of RStudio. When you create a project, RStudio creates an `.Rproj` file that links all of your files and outputs to the project directory. When you import data from a file, R automatically looks for it in the project directory instead of you having to specify a full file path on your computer (like `/Users/<username>/Desktop/`). R also automatically saves any output to the project directory. Finally, projects allow you to save your R environment in `.RData` so that when you close RStudio and then re-open it, you can start right where you left off without re-importing any data or re-calculating any intermediate steps.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you create a project, RStudio creates an `.Rproj` file that links all of your files and outputs to the project directory. When you import data from a file, R automatically looks for it in the project directory instead of you having to specify a full file path on your computer (like `/Users/<username>/Desktop/`). R also automatically saves any output to the project directory. Finally, projects allow you to save your R environment in `.RData` so that when you close RStudio and then re-open it, you can start right where you left off without re-importing any data or re-calculating any intermediate steps.
```

RStudio has a simple interface to create and switch between projects, accessed from the button in the top-right corner of the RStudio window. (Labeled "Project: (None)", initially.)

Let's create a project to work in for this tutorial. Start by clicking the "Project" button in the upper right or going to the "File" menu. Select "New Project", and the following will appear:

![](/images/create_project.png){width=75%}

Choose "New Directory" followed by "New Project" and click on "Browse...". Navigate to your Desktop, and name the directory `<course_name> R`(replace `<course_name>` with the name of your class, e.g. `MICB301`) for this project.

After your project is created, navigate to its directory using your Finder/File explorer or the integrated Terminal in RStudio. You will see the ".RProj" file has been created.

You can open this project in the future in one of three ways:

- In your file browser (e.g. Finder or Explorer), simply double-click on the `.RProj` file 
- In an open RStudio window, choose "File" &rarr; "Open Project"
- Switch among projects by clicking on the R project symbol in the upper left
corner of RStudio

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```{r quiz: R Projects, echo=FALSE}
question("What is not a benefit of using RStudio projects?",
    answer("All of your files and outputs are linked to the project directory"),
    answer("R automatically looks for files in the project directory so you don't have to specify a full file path"),
    answer("When you reopen a project, your code is saved so all you need to do is rerun it", correct=TRUE)
)
```

## Variables in R

> 

Author: ```suggestion
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
- Declare variables
- Perform operations to change the value of variables
```

We use variables to store data that we want to access or manipulate later. Variables must have unique names.  

Without declaring a variable the sum of these two numbers will be printed to console but cannot be accessed for future use:

```{r novar, exercise=TRUE}
2 + 2 
```

To declare a variable, follow the pattern of: `variable <- value`. Let's declare a variable `total` as the sum of two numbers.

```{r d_var, exercise=TRUE}
total <- 2 + 2
```

We access the value of `total`:

```{r var, exercise=TRUE}
total
```

We can use the value stored in `total`:

```{r sub_var, exercise=TRUE}
total - 1
```

After declaring a variable, we can perform operations to change the value stored in the variable:

```{r sub_var2, exercise=TRUE}
total <- total - 1

total
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion
Now it's your turn! Declare a variable "product" and set its value to 3 * 5. Next, operating on "product", declare a variable called "difference", whose final value is 8.

```{r product, exercise=TRUE}
# First declare "product"
product

# Operate on "product" to get 8 as the value for "difference"
difference

```{r product-hint-1}
# First declare "product"
product <- #your code here

# Operate on "product" to get 8 as the value for "difference"
difference <- product #your code here

```{r product-solution}
# First declare "product"
product <- 3 * 5

# Operate on "product" to get 8 as the value for "difference"
difference <- product - 7
```
```

## Functions

> 

Author: ```suggestion
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
- Explain what functions and arguments are
```

![](/images/function.png){width=75%}

For example, the function `sum()` (which outputs the sum of the arguments) expects numbers:

```{r sum_function, exercise=TRUE}
sum(3, 5, 9, 18)
```

If you instead pass text as arguments to `sum()` you will receive an error:

```{r sum_text, exercise=TRUE, error = TRUE}
sum("Sum", "does", "not", "accept", "text!")
```
The use of functions isn't limited to mathematical calculations. Function can also be used to transform data.

For example, the function `t()` can be used to transpose a matrix. In the example below, we generate a matrix (`example_matrix`) using the functions `c()` and `as.matrix()`, which were used to combine values into a vector and transform the vector into a matrix. We then use the `t()` function to transpose `example_matrix` into the matrix `example_transposed`.

```{r t_function, exercise=TRUE}
# Generate Matrix
example_list <- c("T", "does", "accept", "text!")
example_matrix <- as.matrix(example_list)

#Transpose Matrix
example_transposed <- t(example_matrix)

#Display Original and Transposed Matrices
example_matrix
example_transposed

> ```

Author: ```suggestion
```{r quiz: R Functions, echo=FALSE}
question("True or False: Functions accept inputs of all types",
    answer("True"),
    answer("False", correct=TRUE)
)
```

### The most helpful function of all: the 'help' function

> You can get information about a specific function by running the command `?<function>` or `help(<function>)` (replace `<function>` by the name of the function you are interested in). This command opens the help page, where you can find all information about a function's purpose and its arguments. For beginners, it is useful to concentrate on the "Examples" and "Arguments" section to understand the typical usage of the function better.

Reviewer: You can also type the function into the search box of the help window in the files plots packages help pane. That way it is never part of the Rscript.

Run the code below to read the documentation for the `t()` function.

```{r transpose_help, exercise=TRUE}
?t
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion

```

## R packages

> 

Author: ```suggestion
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
- Understand what R packages are and how they are used
- Install and load packages
```

```{r eval = FALSE}
install.packages("tidyverse")
```

### Loading packages

After installing a package, and *everytime* you open a new RStudio session, you need to first load (open) the packages you want to use with the `library()` function. This tells R to access the package's functions and prevents RStudio from lags that would occur if it automatically loaded every downloaded package every time you opened it.

Packages can be loaded like this:

```{r eval = FALSE}
library(tidyverse)
```
It is a little tricker to load Bioconductor packages, as they are often not stored on the Comprehensive R Archive Network (CRAN) where most packages live. There is a package, however, that lives on CRAN and serves as an interface between CRAN and the Bioconductor packages.

To load a Bioconductor package, you must first install and load the BiocManager package, like so.

`install.packages("BiocManager")`
`library("BiocManager)`

You can then use the function `BiocManager::install()` to install a Bioconductor package. To install the Annotate package, we would execute the following code.

`BiocManager::install("annotate")`

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sometimes two packages include functions with the same name. A common example is that a `select()` function is included both in the `dplyr` and `MASS` packages. Therefore, to specify the use of a function from a particular package, you can precede the function with a the following notation: `package::function()`. 
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```{r quiz: R Packages, echo=FALSE}
question("True or False: Packages are installed once, but loaded every time",
    answer("True", correct=TRUE),
    answer("False")
)
```

## Working with data

> 

Author: ```suggestion
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
- Load data into R
- Save loaded data in the environment
```

> ### Data description

Reviewer 2: Does this need to be in a "child document?" 

I couldn't figure out how to do this on my tutorial though...

Reviewer 3: Yes, exactly. Look at the Slack#educe, Gil talks about how he set up the child document.

Author: Do I just replace all of the text here with his code? Not super sure what exactly the user is supposed to see here.

The data used throughout this module were collected as part of an on-going oceanographic time-series program in Saanich Inlet, a seasonally anoxic fjord on the East coast of Vancouver Island, British Columbia.

The data that you will use in R are 16S rRNA amplicon profiles of microbial communities at several depths in Saanich Inlet from one time-point in this series (August 2012). These ~300 bp sequences were processed using [mothur](https://www.mothur.org/wiki/Main_Page) to yield 97% (approximately species-level) operational taxonomic units (OTUs). 

`Saanich_OTU_metadata.csv` is a comma-delimited table of counts of four OTUs in each sample, normalized to 100,000 sequences per sample and the corresponding conditions of each sample (Depth, NO2, NO3 etc.). 

For a brief introduction to these data, see Hallam SJ et al. 2017. Monitoring microbial responses to ocean deoxygenation in a model oxygen minimum zone. Sci Data 4: 170158 [doi:10.1038/sdata.2017.158](https://www.nature.com/articles/sdata2017158).

### Loading tabular data

> Data tables can be loaded into R using the tidyverse `read_*` function.

Author: ```suggestion
Tabular data can be loaded into R using the tidyverse `read_*` functions, which generate data frames. Each row in a data frame represents one observation, and each column represents one variable. 
```

in your file browser, create a `data` directory in your project directory. Download the [`Saanich_OTU_metadata.csv`](https://github.com/EDUCE-UBC/educer/blob/master/data-raw/Saanich_OTU_metadata.csv) file and save it in your `data` directory.

For example, we can load our Saanich data into R with `read_csv` for a comma-separated file and specify the arguments that describe our data as follows:

- `file`: the name of the file you want to load
- `col_names`: can take either the value `TRUE` or `FALSE` and tells R if the first row contains column names

```{r, eval = FALSE}
read_csv(file="data/Saanich_OTU_metadata.csv", col_names = TRUE)
```

```{r, echo = FALSE}
OTU_metadata_table <- combined
```

### Save data in the environment

Since we want to do more with our data after reading it in, we need to save it as a variable in R as we did previously with the `<-` operator. You can choose to name the object whatever you like, though this module assumes the names used below.

```{r eval = FALSE}
OTU_metadata_table <- read_csv(file="data/Saanich_OTU_metadata.csv", col_names = TRUE)
```

> ### Data exploration

Reviewer 2: Perhaps a note for Stephan more than Cathy, but the following section is redundant with a section in the `data_wrangling_basic` module.

Reviewer 3: Yes, Cathy will remove the section next time.

Let's explore the data that we've imported into R.

Using different functions, we can look at the dimensions of our data, number of rows, and number of columns:
```{r}
#number of rows followed by number of columns
dim(OTU_metadata_table)

#number of rows
nrow(OTU_metadata_table)

#number of columns
ncol(OTU_metadata_table)
```

We can list the column names using `colnames()`:
```{r}
colnames(OTU_metadata_table)
```

We can select to work with only specific columns/variables from our table using the `select()` function:
```{r}
restricted_columns <- select(OTU_metadata_table, Depth, OTU0001, OTU0002,
                             OTU0004)
```

We can filter for specific rows based on a column value using the `filter()` function. Here we restrict for rows where the value for `Depth` is smaller than 135. 

```{r}

> above_135_depth <- filter(OTU_metadata_table, Depth < 135)

Reviewer: The filter function created conflict, worked only as dplyr : : filter(). This issue has been reviewed before for select(), could use either example to demonstrate the notation

```

We can also only choose to work with specific rows based on their position in our data table using the `slice()` function. 

```{r}
first_five_rows <- slice(OTU_metadata_table, 1:5)
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion

```

> ## Getting Help

Reviewer 2: Is this not redundant with a section above?

Reviewer 3: Yes, this should be restructured.

Author: I've deleted the section above as this section is more detailed

> You can get help with any function in R by inputting `?function_name` into the Console. This will open a window in the bottom right under the Help tab with information on that function, including input options and example code.

Author: ```suggestion
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
- Use R to understand how any given function works
- Identify required and optional arguments for functions

You can get help with any function in R by inputting `?function_name` into the Console. This will open a window in the bottom right under the Help tab with information on that function, including input options and example code.
```

- `.data` is a mandatory input which refers to the parent dataset or tibble to subset from
- the helper functions and list of operators could be used to specify the columns to subset

The **Value** section describes an object integral to `select()`. A more descriptive account can be read in the help section

The **Method** section describes the implementation method of the function `select()`

The **Examples** Section has examples of the function that can be directly copy and pasted into your terminal and ran. 
```{r quiz: navigating help, echo=FALSE}
question("How would you launch a help section for a given function",
  answer("Place an exclamation mark in front of the function"),
  answer("Place an question mark in front of the function", correct = TRUE),
  answer("Place an question mark after of the function"),
  answer("Type out help and function name in the console")
)

question("What does an = sign indicate in the help section",
         answer("There exists a default and is not mandatory", correct = TRUE),
         answer("Is a mandatory input in the function")
)
```
## R Scripts

> 

Author: ```suggestion
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
- Create an R script file
- List the benefits of using R scripts
- Annotate R scripts with comments
```

library(educer)
# Helper function to set path to images to "/images" etc.
setup_resources()

# Tutorial specific setup
library(dplyr)
library(readr)
total <- 4
```

## Learning objectives

Here's what you'll learn from each section of this tutorial:

A Tour of RStudio:

- Name the three panes in RStudio and what they do
- Change the sizes of the panes
- Navigate through the console using common keyboard shortcuts
- Change the appearance of RStudio

RStudio Projects:

- List the benefits of using RStudio Projects
- Create a new RStudio Project
- Open or switch to an existing RStudio Project

R Scripts:

- Create an R script file
- List the benefits of using R scripts
- Annotate R scripts with comments

Variables in R:

- Declare variables
- Perform operations to change the value of variables

Functions in R:

- Explain what functions and arguments are
- Use R to understand how any given function works
- Identify required and optional arguments for functions

R Packages:

- Understand what R packages are and how they are used
- Install and load packages

## A Tour of RStudio

When you start RStudio, you will see something like the following window appear:

> ![](/images/rstudio.png){width=100%}

Author: This image shows up

- Environment/History (tabbed in the upper right): view current user-defined objects and previously-entered commands, respectively.

- Files/Help/Plots/Packages (tabbed in the lower right): as their names suggest, you can view the contents of the current directory, the built-in help pages, and the graphics you created, as well as manage R packages.

To change the look of RStudio, you can go to Tools &rarr; Global Options &rarr; Appearance and select colours, font size, etc. If you plan on working for longer periods of time, we suggest choosing a dark background colour which is less hard on your computer battery and your eyes.
You can also change the sizes of the panes by dragging the dividers or clicking on the expand and compress icons at the top right corner of each pane.

### Check Your Understanding

When trying to run a command, you see this error:

> ![](/images/objecterror.png){width=100%}

Author: This image does not show

Reviewer 3: So where in the repo did you place your image?

    progressive: true
    allow_skip: true
runtime: shiny_prerendered

> description: Welcome to R! If you want to analyze and visualize data reproducibly, you've come to the right place. This tutorial covers the basics of R and RStudio. RStudio is a free program used for coding in R. After learning about its features and functionality, we will dive into R language basics, where you will create functions and load packages.

Reviewer 2: Nice, much better description.

## Learning objectives

Here's what you'll learn from each section of this tutorial:

A Tour of RStudio:

- Name the three panes in RStudio and what they do
- Change the sizes of the panes
- Navigate through the console using common keyboard shortcuts
- Change the appearance of RStudio

RStudio Projects:

- List the benefits of using RStudio Projects
- Create a new RStudio Project
- Open or switch to an existing RStudio Project

R Scripts:

- Create an R script file
- List the benefits of using R scripts
- Annotate R scripts with comments

Variables in R:

- Declare variables
- Perform operations to change the value of variables

Functions in R:

- Explain what functions and arguments are
- Use R to understand how any given function works
- Identify required and optional arguments for functions

R Packages:

- Understand what R packages are and how they are used
- Install and load packages

> 

Reviewer 2: Nice, this is a much clearer way of conveying the learning goals.

Working with Data:

- Load data into R

> - Save loaded data in the environment

Reviewer 2: This section is redundant with wrangling-basic, just FYI.

- Recognize and use functions.
- Install and load R packages.
- Load and subset tabular data using tidyverse.
- Use the `help` function in R console to troubleshoot and identify required arguments for a given function

## A Tour of RStudio
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
- Name the three panes in RStudio and what they do
- Change the sizes of the panes
- Navigate through the console using common keyboard shortcuts
- Change the appearance of RStudio
When you start RStudio, you will see something like the following window appear:

![](/images/rstudio.png){width=100%}

Notice that the window has three "panes":

> - Console (lower left side): this is your view of the R engine. You can type in R commands here and see the output printed by R. (To tell them apart, your input is in blue, and the output is black.) There are several editing conveniences available: up and down arrow keys to go back to previously entered commands which you then can edit and re-run, TAB for completing the name before the cursor, and so on. See more in [online docs](http://www.rstudio.com/ide/docs/using/keyboard_shortcuts).

Reviewer 2: I would maybe suggest that the Console is for quick exploration, and is handy in, say, printing a data frame or checking the length of a vector or something, if you haven't addressed this later.

- Environment/History (tabbed in the upper right): view current user-defined objects and previously-entered commands, respectively.

- Files/Help/Plots/Packages (tabbed in the lower right): as their names suggest, you can view the contents of the current directory, the built-in help pages, and the graphics you created, as well as manage R packages.

To change the look of RStudio, you can go to Tools &rarr; Global Options &rarr; Appearance and select colours, font size, etc. If you plan on working for longer periods of time, we suggest choosing a dark background colour which is less hard on your computer battery and your eyes.
You can also change the sizes of the panes by dragging the dividers or clicking on the expand and compress icons at the top right corner of each pane. 

> ```{r quiz: R Tour, echo=FALSE}

Reviewer 2: Be careful here--users can re-arrange the panes in the Rstudio options. I can imagine someone might not have this configuration...I certainly don't!

To change the look of RStudio, you can go to Tools &rarr; Global Options &rarr; Appearance and select colours, font size, etc. If you plan on working for longer periods of time, we suggest choosing a dark background colour which is less hard on your computer battery and your eyes.
You can also change the sizes of the panes by dragging the dividers or clicking on the expand and compress icons at the top right corner of each pane.

### Check Your Understanding

When trying to run a command, you see this error:

![](/images/objecterror.png){width=100%}

```{r Tour, echo=FALSE}
quiz(
  question("Where is the command typed?",
    answer("The console", correct=TRUE),
    answer("Lower right pane"),
    answer("Upper right pane")),
  
  question("Where can you go to try to locate 'object'?",
    answer("The console"),
    answer("Lower right pane"),

>     answer("Upper right pane", correct=TRUE))

Reviewer 2: Yes, this is a neat idea. I like this style of questioning--introducing students to the types of common errors they might encounter is prudent. Well done.

- Switch among projects by clicking on the R project symbol in the upper left
corner of RStudio

```{r quiz: R Projects, echo=FALSE}
question("What is not a benefit of using RStudio projects?",
    answer("All of your files and outputs are linked to the project directory"),
    answer("R automatically looks for files in the project directory so you don't have to specify a full file path"),
    answer("When you reopen a project, your code is saved so all you need to do is rerun it", correct=TRUE)

> )

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure how useful it is having quizzes for this kind of content. What do you think, Cathy and Stephan? Though I can appreciate how it might be useful in getting someone to learn about RStudio projects, I might just give a few use cases, link to the docs, and leave it at that.

total
```

> Now it's your turn! Declare a variable "product" and set its value to 3 * 5. Next, operating on "product", declare a variable called "difference", whose final value is 8.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now it's your turn! Declare a variable "product" and set its value to the product of the numbers 3 and 5. Next, using the variable "product", declare a variable called "difference", whose final value is 8.
```

```{r product, exercise=TRUE}
# First declare "product"
product

# Operate on "product" to get 8 as the value for "difference"
difference

```{r product-hint-1}
# First declare "product"
product <- #your code here

# Operate on "product" to get 8 as the value for "difference"
difference <- product #your code here

```{r product-solution}
# First declare "product"
product <- 3 * 5

# Operate on "product" to get 8 as the value for "difference"
difference <- product - 7

> 

Reviewer 2: Nice job! I might also give a few use cases for functions. Python has those neat recursive functions (not sure if those exist in R), but you could also talk about taking some raw data doing some long processing all in one shot, if you have the processing function already written. This could open the door to the whole API style of programming, though that might be beyond the scope of this tutorial.

We can copy and paste the previous commands in this tutorial and aggregate it in our R script.

```{r Scripts, echo=FALSE}
quiz(
  question("How do R scripts make your work reproducible?",
    answer("Trick question: they work just like Excel and don't make work reproducible"),
    answer("They keep a record of all actions done to get from raw data to final results", correct=TRUE),
    answer("You can use them to test different operations on your data")

> ),

Reviewer 2: Is it worth introducing the `set.seed()` function for reproducible random simulations? Might be out of the scope of this tutorial but it's also a pretty straightforward function. What do you think @cathy-y and @stephan-koenig?

OTU_metadata_table <- read_csv(file="data/Saanich_OTU_metadata.csv", col_names = TRUE)
```

### Data exploration

Let's explore the data that we've imported into R.

Using different functions, we can look at the dimensions of our data, number of rows, and number of columns:
```{r}
#number of rows followed by number of columns
dim(OTU_metadata_table)

#number of rows
nrow(OTU_metadata_table)

#number of columns
ncol(OTU_metadata_table)
```

We can list the column names using `colnames()`:
```{r}
colnames(OTU_metadata_table)
```

We can select to work with only specific columns/variables from our table using the `select()` function:
```{r}
restricted_columns <- select(OTU_metadata_table, Depth, OTU0001, OTU0002,
                             OTU0004)
```

We can filter for specific rows based on a column value using the `filter()` function. Here we restrict for rows where the value for `Depth` is smaller than 135. 

```{r}
above_135_depth <- filter(OTU_metadata_table, Depth < 135)
```

We can also only choose to work with specific rows based on their position in our data table using the `slice()` function. 

```{r}
first_five_rows <- slice(OTU_metadata_table, 1:5)
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Yup, good to delete this. It's covered in `wrangling-basic`.

> The **Examples** Section has examples of the function that can be directly copy and pasted into your terminal and ran. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The **Examples** Section has examples of the function that can be directly copied and pasted into your terminal and run. 
```
